---
layout: "../layout/PostLayout.astro"
setup: | 
  import YourTurn from "../components/YourTurn.astro"
  import Note from "../components/Note.astro"
  import Warning from "../components/Warning.astro"
  import Tip from "../components/Tip.astro"
lesson: 16
toc_num: 17
---
 
## <a name="less10"> </a> Lesson 16:  Writing Your Own Functions

We've seen a number of R's built-in functions so far, but here comes the
best part -- you can write your *own* functions.

Recall a line we had earlier:

``` r
> sum(Nile > 1200)
```

This gave us the count of the elements in the `Nile` data larger than 1200.  
Now, say we want the mean of those elements:

``` r
> gt1200 <- which(Nile > 1200)
> nileSubsetGT1200 <- Nile[gt1200]
> mean(nileSubsetGT1200)
[1] 1250
```

As before, we could instead write a more compact version,

``` r
> mean(Nile[Nile > 1200])
[1] 1250
```

But it's best to do it step by step at first.  Let's see how those steps
work.  Writing the code with line numbers for reference, the code is

``` r
1  gt1200Indices <- which(Nile > 1200)
2  nileSubsetGT1200 <- Nile[gt1200Indices]
3  mean(nileSubsetGT1200)
```

Let's review how this works:  

* In line 1, we find the indices in `Nile` for the elements larger than 1200.

* In line 2, we extract the subset of `Nile` consisting of those
  elements.

* In line 3, we compute the desired mean.

But we may wish to do this kind thing often, on many datasets etc.  Then
we have:

<Tip>

> **Tip:**
> If we have an operation we will use a lot, we should consider writing a
> function for it.
>
> Say we want to do the above again, but with 1350 instead of 1200.  Or,
> with the `tg$len` vector from our ToothGrowth example, with 10.2 as
> our lower bound.  We *could* keep typing the same pattern as above,
> but if we're going to do this a lot, it's better to write a function
> for it:

</Tip>

Here is our function:

``` r
> mgd <- function(x,d) mean(x[x > d])
```

Here I've used a compact form for convenience.  (Otherwise I'd
need to use *blocks* to be covered in a later lesson.)  I named it `mgd`
for "mean of elements greater than d," but any name is fine.

Let's try it out, then explain:

``` r
> mgd(Nile,1200)
[1] 1250
> mgd(tg$len,10.2)
[1] 21.58125
```

This saved me typing.  In the second call, I would have had to type

``` r
mean(tg$len[tg$len > 10.2])
```

considerably longer.  But even more importantly, I'd have to think about
the operation each time I used it; by making a function out of it, I've
got it ready to go, all debugged, whenever I need it.

So, how does all this work?  Again, look at the code:

``` r
> mgd <- function(x,d) mean(x[x > d])
> class(mgd)
[1] "function"
```

There is a lot going on here.  Bear with me for a moment, as I bring in
a little of the "theory" of R:
 
Odd to say, but there is a built-in function in R itself named
'function'!  We've already seen several built-in R functions, e.g.
 `mean()`, `sum()` and `plot()`.  Well, here is another,
 `function()`.  We're calling it here.  And its job is to build a
function. Yes, as I like to say, to my students' amusement,

> "The function of the function named `function` is to build functions!
> And the class of object returned by `function` is `function`!"

So, in the line

``` r
> mgd <- function(x,d) mean(x[x > d])
```

we are telling R, "R, I want to write my own function.  I'd like to name
it `mgd`; it will have arguments `x` and `d`, and it will do `mean(x[x > d])`. Please build the function for me. Thanks in advance, R!"

Here we called `function` to build a `function` object, and then
assigned to `mgd`.  We can then call the latter, as we saw above,
repeated here for convenience:

``` r
> mgd(Nile,1200)
[1] 1250
```

In executing

``` r
> mgd <- function(x,d) mean(x[x > d])
```


`x` and `d` are known as *formal* arguments, as they are just
placeholders.  For example, in 

``` r
> mgd(Nile,1200)
```

we said, "R, please execute `mgd` with `Nile` playing the role of
`x`, and 1200 playing the role of `d`.  Here `Nile` and 1200 are
known as the *actual* arguments.

As with variables, we can pretty much name functions and their arguments
as we please.

As you have seen with R's built-in functions, a function will typically
have a return value.  In our case here, we could arrange that by writing

``` r
> mgd <- function(x,d) return(mean(x[x > d]))
```

a bit more complicated than the above version.  But the call to
**return** is not needed here, because in any function, R will return the
last value computed, in this case the requested mean.

And we can save the function for later use.  One way to do this is to
call R's `save` function, which can be used to save any R object:

``` r
> save(mgd,file='mean_greater_than_d')
```

The function has now been saved in the indicated file, which will be in
whatever folder R is running in right now.  We can leave R, and say,
come back tomorrow.  If we then start R from that same folder, we then
run

``` r
> load('mean_greater_than_d')
```

and then `mgd` will be restored, ready for us to use again.
(Typically this is not the way people save code, but this is
the subject of a later lesson.)

Let's write another function, this one to find the range of a vector,
i.e. the difference between the minimal and maximal values:

``` r
> rng <- function(y) max(y) - min(y)
> rng(Nile)
[1] 914
```

Here we made use of the built-in R functions `max` and `min`.

<Tip>

> **Tip:** Build new functions from old
> ones (which may in turn depend on other old ones, etc.).

</Tip>

Again, the last item computed is the subtraction, so it will be
automatically returned, just what we want.  As before, I chose to name
the argument `y`, but it could be anything.  However, I did not name
the function `range`, as there is already a built-in R function of that
name.

<YourTurn>

> **Your Turn:**  Try your hand at writing some simple functions along
> the lines seen here.  You might start by writing a function `cgd()`,
> like `mgd()` above, but returning the count of the number of
> elements in `x` that are greater than `d`.  Then may try writing a
> function `n0(x)`, that returns the number of 0s in the vector
> `x`.  (Hint:  Make use of R's `==` and `sum`.) Another
> suggestion would be a function `hld(x,d)`, which draws a histogram
> for those elements in the vector `x` that are less than `d`.
> Write at least 4 or 5 functions; the more you write, the easier it
> will be in later lessons.

</YourTurn>

Functions are R objects, just as are vectors, lists and so on.  Thus, we
can print them by just typing their names!

``` r
> mgd <- function(x,d) mean(x[x > d])
> mgd
function(x,d) mean(x[x > d])
```
