---
layout: "../layout/PostLayout.astro"
lesson: 23
toc_num: 24
---
 
## <a name="s3"> </a> Lesson 23:  S3 classes

> <span style="color: #b4637a;">Tip:</span>
> Remember, the point of computers is to alleviate us of work.  We should
> avoid doing what the computer could do.  For instance,
> concerning the graph in the last lesson: We had typed

``` r
> abline(181.4366,0.6936)
```

but we really shouldn't have to type those numbers in by hand -- and we
don't have to.  Here's why:

As mentioned earlier, R is an *object-oriented language*. Everthing is
an `object`, and every object has a `class`.  One of the most common
class structures is called `S3`.  

When we call `lm`, the latter returns an S3 object of `lm` class:

``` r
> lmout <- lm(Weight ~ Age,data=mlb)
> class(lmout)
[1] "lm"
```

A handy way to take a quick glance at the contents of an object is
**str**:

``` r
> str(lmout)
List of 12
 $ coefficients : Named num [1:2] 181.437 0.694
  ..- attr(*, "names")= chr [1:2] "(Intercept)" "Age"
...
...
 - attr(*, "class")= chr "lm"
```

Our use of ... here is to indicate that we've omitted a lot of the
output.  But a couple of things stand out even in this excerpt:

1. Our `lmout` object here is an R list (which is typical of S3
   objects).  That R list here has 12 elements.

2. But it has an extra `attribute`, which is the class name, in this
   case `lm`.  (So the designers of R simply chose to name the class
after the function, which is not always the case.)

3. The first of the elements of this R list is named `coefficients`, and it
   is a vector containing the slope and intercept.

So, we don't have to type the slope and intercept in by hand after all.

``` r
> cfs <- lmout$coefficients
> abline(a = cfs[1], b = cfs[2])
```

By the way, `abline()` is actually a `generic` function, like
 `print()` and `plot()`.  So if we want to be clever, we can add our
line to the graph using this approach:

``` r
> abline(lmout)
```

Now, what about our original question -- do baseball players gain weight
as they age?  The answer appears to be yes; for each additional year of
age, the estimated mean age increases by about 0.7 pound.  That's about
7 pounds in 10 years, rather remarkable.

Again, this is only an estimate -- 181.437 and 0.694 are estimates of
the unknown population values &beta;<sub>0</sub> and &beta;<sub>1</sub>.
-- generated from sample data.  We can get an idea of the accuracy of
this estimate by calculating a *confidence interval*, but we'll leave
that for statistics courses.

But we can do more right now.  One might ask, Shouldn't we also account
for a player's height, not just his age?  After all, taller people tend
to be heavier.  Yes, we should do this:

``` r
> lmo <- lm(Weight ~ Height + Age, data=mlb)
> lmo

Call:
lm(formula = Weight ~ Height + Age, data = mlb)

Coefficients:
(Intercept)       Height          Age  
  -187.6382       4.9236       0.9115  
```

Here we instruct R to find the estimated regression function of weight,
using both height and age as predictors.  The `+` doesn't mean addition; it
is simply a delimiter between the predictors height and age in our regression
specification.

So the new model is 

mean weight = &beta;<sub>0</sub> + &beta;<sub>1</sub> height  + &beta;<sub>2</sub> age


This says:

    estimated mean weight = -187.6382 + 4.9236 height + 0.9115 age

So, under this more refined analysis, things are even more pessimistic;
players on average gain about 0.9 pounds per year.  And by the way, an
extra inch of height corresponds on average to about 4.9 pounds of extra
weight; taller players are indeed heavier, as we surmized.

<span style="color: #b4637a;">Warning:</span>
Though this is not a statistics tutorial *per se*, an important point
should be noted.  Regression analysis has two goals, Description and
Prediction.  Our above analysis was aimed at the former -- we want to
*describe* the nature of fitness issues in pro baseball players. As we
saw, a coefficient can change quite a lot when another predictor is
added to the model, and in fact can even change sign ("Simpson's
Paradox").  Suppose for instance the shorter players tend to have longer
careers.  If we do *not* include height in our model, that omission
might bias the age coefficient downward.  Thus great care must be taken
in interpreting coefficients in the Description setting.  For
Prediction, it is not as much of an issue.

> **Your Turn:** In the `mtcars` data, fit a linear model of the
> regression of MPG against weight and horsepower; what is the estimated
> effect of 100 pounds of extra weight, for fixed horsepower?
