---
layout: "../layout/PostLayout.astro"
lesson: 24
toc_num: 25
---
 
## <a name="less15"> </a> Lesson 24:  Baseball Player Analysis (cont'd.)

This lesson will be a little longer and more detail-oriented.  But it
will give you more practice on a number of earlier topics, and will also
bring in some new R functions for you.  Spending extra time on
this lesson will pay substantial dividends.

We might wonder whether the regression lines differ much among player
positions.  (A more statistical approach would be to include
*interaction terms* in the model.) Let's first see what positions are
tabulated:

```r
> table(mlb$PosCategory)
   Catcher  Infielder Outfielder    Pitcher 
        76        210        194        535 
```

Let's fit the regression lines separately for each position type. 

There are various ways to do this, involving avoidance of loops to
various degrees.  But we'll keep it simple, which will be clearer.

First, let's split the data by position.  You might at first think this
is easily done using the **split** function, but that doesn't work,
since that function is for splitting vectors.  Here we wish to split a
data frame.

So what can be done instead?  We need to think creatively here.  One
solution is this:

We need to determine the row numbers of the catchers, the row numbers of
the infielders and so on.  So we can take all the row numbers,
**1:nrow(mlb)**, and apply **split** to that vector!

```r
> rownums <- split(1:nrow(mlb),mlb$PosCategory)
```

> <span style="color: #b4637a;">Tip:</span>
> As usual, following an intricate operation like this, we should glance
> at the result:

```r
> str(rownums)
List of 4
 $ Catcher   : int [1:76] 1 2 3 35 36 66 67 68 101 102 ...
 $ Infielder : int [1:210] 4 5 6 7 8 9 37 38 39 40 ...
 $ Outfielder: int [1:194] 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 43 44 45 ...
 $ Pitcher   : int [1:535] 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 ...
```

So the output is an R list; no surprise there, as we knew before before
that **split** produces an R list.  Also not surprisingly, the elements
of the list are named "Catcher" etc.  So for example, the third
outfielder is in row 12 of the data frame.

> <span style="color: #b4637a;">Tip:</span>
> The idea here, using **split** on **1:nrow(mlb)**, was a bit of a trick.
> Actually, it is a common ploy for experienced R coders, but you might
> ask, "How could a novice come up with this idea?"  The answer, as noted
> several times already here, is that programming is a creative process.
> Creativity may not come quickly!  In some case, one might need to mull
> over a problem for a long time before coming up with a solution.  Don't
> give up!  The more you think about a problem, the more skilled you will
> get, even if you sometimes come up empty-handed.  And of course, 
> there are many forums on the Web at which you can ask questions,
> e.g. Stack Overflow.

> <span style="color: #b4637a;">Tip:</span>
> Now, remember, a nice thing about R lists is that we can reference their
> elements in various ways.  The first element above, for instance, is any
> of **rownums$Catcher**, **rownums[['Catcher']]** and **rownums[[1]]**,
> This versatility is great, as for example we can use the latter two
> forms to write loops.

And a loop is exactly what we need here.  We want to call **lm** four
times, once for each position.  We could do this, say, with a loop
beginning with

```r
for (i in 1:4)
```

to iterate through the four position types, but it will be clearer if we
use the names:

```r
for (pos in c('Catcher','Infielder','Outfielder','Pitcher'))
```

Just an ordinary 'for' loop.  Recall such loops are of the form

```r
for (variable in vector)...
```

Instead of having a numeric vector, e.g. the 1:4 above, we now have a
character vector, which each element of the vector being a character
string, but the principles are the same.

We could have **lm** and **print** calls in the body of the loop.
But let's be a little fancier, building up a data frame with the output.
We'll start with an empty frame, and keep adding rows to it.

Our code is

```r
posNames <- c('Catcher','Infielder','Outfielder','Pitcher')
m <- data.frame()
for (pos in posNames) {
   posRows <- rownums[[pos]]
   lmo <- lm(Weight ~ Age, data = mlb[posRows,])
   newrow <- lmo$coefficients
   m <- rbind(m,newrow)
}
```

Here is the output:

```r
> m
  X180.828029016113 X0.794925225995348
1          180.8280          0.7949252
2          170.2466          0.8589593
3          176.2884          0.7883343
4          185.5994          0.6543904
```

Some key things to note here.  

*  The overall strategy is to start with an empty data frame, then keep
   adding rows to it, one row of regression coefficients per playing position.

*  In order to add rows to **m**, we used R's **rbind** ("row bind")
   function.  The expression **rbind(m,newrow)** forms a new data frame,
by tacking **newrow** onto **m**.  Here we reassign the result back to
**m**, also a common operation.  (Note carefully: The **rbind**
operation did not change **m**; it merely created a new data frame.  To
update **m**, we needed to assign that new data frame to **m**.)
By the way, there is also a **cbind** function for columns.
   
*  In the call to **lm**, we used **mlb[rownums[[pos]],]** instead of
   **mlb** as previously, since here we wanted to fit a regression line
on each position subgroup.  So, we restricted attention to only those
rows of **mlb** for which the position was equal to the current value of
**pos**.

So, what happens is:  **m** is initially an empty data frame.  Then the
loop, for its first iteration, sets **pos** to 'Catcher'.  Then a
regression line will be fit to the rows of **mlb** that are for
catchers.  That line is returned to us from **lm**, and we assign it to
**lmo**.  (Once again, the name is arbitrary; I chose this one to
symbolize "lm output.")  We extract the coefficients and tack them on at
the end of **m**.

> <span style="color: #b4637a;">Tip:</span> This is a very common *design
> pattern* in R (and most other languages)

Nice output, with the two columns aligned.  But those column names are
awful, and the row labels should be nicer than 1,2,3,4.  We can fix
these things:

```r
> row.names(m) <- posNames
> names(m) <- c('intercept','slope')
> m
           intercept     slope
Catcher     180.8280 0.7949252
Infielder   170.2466 0.8589593
Outfielder  176.2884 0.7883343
Pitcher     185.5994 0.6543904
```

What happened here?  We earlier saw the built-in **row.names** function,
so that setting row names was easy.  But what about the column names?
Recall that a data frame is actually an R list, consisting of several
vectors of the same length, which form the columns.  So, **names(m)** is
the names of the columns.

So with a little finessing here, we got some nicely-formatted output.
Moreover, we now have our results in a data frame for further use.  For
instance, we may wish to plot the four lines on the same graph, and we
would use rows of the data frame as input.

A little more finessing is possible.  Look at the line

```r
posNames <- c('Catcher','Infielder','Outfielder','Pitcher')
```

We're using a computer!  We shouldn't have to type out these names by
hand, as I did in this line.  In fact, we already have them in one of
our R objects, **rownums**; recall our earlier check:

```r
> str(rownums)
List of 4
 $ Catcher   : int [1:76] 1 2 3 35 36 66 67 68 101 102 ...
 $ Infielder : int [1:210] 4 5 6 7 8 9 37 38 39 40 ...
 $ Outfielder: int [1:194] 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 43 44 45 ...
 $ Pitcher   : int [1:535] 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 ...
```

The elements of the R list **rownums** are the names of the positions!
So, the better way to set **posNames** is

```r
posNames <- names(rownums)
```

> <span style="color: #b4637a;">Tip:</span> Again, the reader may be thinking,
> "How in the world would I have been able to realize this?"  Again, the
> answer is that as you acquire more experience in coding, you will be
> more and more ability to come up with insights like this.  Patience!

Finally, what about those numerical results?  There is substantial
variation in those estimated slopes, but again, they are only estimates.
The question of whether there is substantial variation at the population
level is one of statistical inference, beyond the scope of this R
course. 
