---
layout: "../layout/PostLayout.astro"
lesson: 35
toc_num: 36
---
 
## <a name="fd"> </a> Lesson 35:  Files and Folders/Directories

Note:  On Unix-family systems such as Linux, the Windows term *folder*
is said to be a *directory*.  You will frequently see this in Mac
discussions as well.  (The Mac OS is a Unix-family system.)  We will
typically use the term *directory* here, as that is what R uses.

In assmebling a dataset for my `regtools` package, I needed to collect
the records of several of my course offerings.  I started in a directory
that had one subdirectory for each offering.  In turn, there was a file
named `Results`.  As an intermediate step, wanted to find all such
files, placing the text for each one in an R list `gFiles`.  Only some
specific columns of each file will be retained.  (The discussion here is
a slightly adapted version.)

The chief R functions I used were:

* `list.dirs()`:**  Returns a character vector with the names of all the
  directories (i.e. subdirectories) within the current directory.

* `dir()`:**  Returns a character vector with the names of all files
  within the current directory.

* `%in%`:**  Determines whether a specified object is an element in a
  specified vector. 

* `setwd()`:**  Changes to the specified directory.

Here is the code:

``` r
getData <- function() {

   currDir <- getwd()  # leave a trail of bread crumbs

   dirs <- list.dirs(recursive=FALSE)
   numCourseOfferings <- 0
   # create empty R list, into which we'll store our course records
   resultsFiles <- list()
   for (d in dirs) {
      setwd(d)  # descend into d directory
      # check if there is a Results file there
      fls <- dir()
      if (!('Results' %in% fls)) {  # not there, skip this dir
         setwd(currDir)
         next
      }
      # ah, there is such a file; increment our count
      numCourseOfferings <- numCourseOfferings + 1
      # open it
      resultsLines <- readLines('Results')
      # delete the comment lines; look at 1st character in each line
      resultsLines <- delComments(resultsLines)
      resultsFiles[[numCourseOfferings]] <- extractCols(resultsLines)
      setwd(currDir)
   }
   resultsFiles  # return all the grades records
}
```

Before we go into the details, note the following:

* The code is written in a top-down manner.  Much of the work of
`getData()` is offloaded to other functions (code not shown),
`delComments()` and `extractCols()`.

* There are lots of comments!

Now, consider the line

``` r
   dirs <- list.dirs(recursive=FALSE)
```

As mentioned, `list.dirs()` will determine all the subdirectories
within the current directory.  But what about subdirectories of
subdirectories, and subdirectories of subdirectories of subdirectories,
and so on?  Setting `recursive` to `FALSE` means we want only
first-level subdirectories.

So, the line

``` r
   for (d in dirs) {
```

will then have us process each (first-level) directory, one by one.

When we enter one of those subdirectories, the line

``` r
      fls <- dir()
```

will determine all the files there, storing the result as a character
vector `fls`.

Then, as the comment notes, the lines

``` r
      if (!('Results' %in% fls)) {  # not there, skip this dir
         setwd(currDir)
         next
      }
```

will, in the event that there is no `Results` file in this
subdirectory, skip this subdirectory.  The R keyword `next` says, "Go
to the next iteration of this loop," which here means to process the
next subdirectory.  Note that to prepare for that, we need to move back
to the original directory:

``` r
         setwd(currDir)
```

On the other hand, if this subdirectory *does* contain a file named
`Results`, the remaining code increments our count of such files,
reads in the found file, and assigns its contents as a new element of
our `resultsFiles` list.
